Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our last
video we introduced the idea of an anti
particle kind of analog in pure mathematics
rate at the Foundation's when we're trying to
set up integers we introduce the idea that besides
starting with nothing and something we might also
include something which we call aunty something
so if our something is represented by simple
mark on the page then our auntie something is
represented by an anti mark which is just a mark
with a little bar over it the same kind of bar
that the physicists use to denote an antiparticle
of a fundamental particle so with this setup we
now have three sort of fundamental ingredients to
build up various multisets so we have a trichotomy
now as opposed to a dichotomy that we had earlier
now this is a development that really has a lot of
consequences that will see and it's particularly
important for us in setting up the arithmetic
of integers certainly what we can do directly
is create the basic integers that correspond to
these three ingredients if we take nothing and put
it in an M set then we get what we call 0 or the
empty em set denoted usually with a circle or a 0
there if we put the single mark in an M set we get
the number that we call one and now if we put this
single anti mark in at em set we get a number that
way to call minus 1 so then our minus 10 11 are
the fundamental integers that correspond to these
three sort of elemental aspects of our fundamental
mathematical reality now it's important to note
that we don't have to do this that it might be
that in some situations things are better modeled
just by a dichotomy between nothing and something
if you're interested in kind of a black and white
situation on and off something binary then it's
perhaps more sensible to just restrict oneself
to this story here but when we're trying to do
arithmetic will see that it really is useful to
have these three things around so now we have
three different types of numbers in this context
we have integers represented by int which consists
of both natural numbers and negative numbers
so natural numbers include things like this
that we're already very familiar with these are
primitive natural numbers now we have negative
numbers which are very much like these except that
they consist of anti marks instead of marks and we
note prominently that the zero or empty multiset
is also an element of both neg and that it is of
type neg is also a type net and then integer
well that represents the combined type where
we're including things of this kind or of this
kind so here are all examples of integers this
is something in that this is something in both net
and neg this is an egg this is an appt this is an
egg they are all in int or all of type int so the
earth medical domain of integers is fundamental to
mathematics and so now a natural question is now
that we have the objects that are going to be our
integers how do we set up arithmetic with them so
the fundamental operation is of course addition
and that's relatively simple because integers are
multi sets and we know how to add multisets we
just do that by combining the entries of various
multisets but there's something a little bit extra
that we have to say so something extra happens
when we're doing addition with integers that we
don't have when we're just adding natural numbers
that's having to do with this reduction or this
simplification due to this fundamental relation
between our mark and our anti mark we've agreed
that if we have a mark and an anti mark to get
they're in the same multi set that they canceled
they canceled to give us just nothing okay so
here's some examples of addition of integers so
here is mark mark and here's mark mark mark
we add them well we just get mark mark mark
mark mark that's a familiar addition of natural
numbers here is a corresponding example using
just negative numbers so there's a negative
number there's another negative number it's
a multi set of anti marks another multi set
of auntie marks we just combine them in the
obvious way to get the sum this would be minus 4
plus minus 2 is minus 6 in our familiar language
more interesting is when we combine a natural
number with a negative number so mark mark plus
an time are can t mark aunty mark so what we do
then is we first combine the two multisets in the
standard way of combining multisets we just put
all of the objects into a single multiset but at
this point we are not finished because we have to
reduce here we see both marks and anti marks and
we're obliged to cancel them so we cancel mark
aunty mark pair as well as another mark ed mart
pair and we're left with a single aunty mark
and here's another example there's a negative
number there is a natural number we combine the
ingredients and then once we have the ingredients
this is just an intermediate stage we still have
to reduce so we pair off marks and auntie marks
make them disappear and we end up with just these
four marks and a special but important case if we
have say to plus minus 2 there's mark mark there's
auntie mark auntie mark we combine them we get the
multiset mark mark an to mark and Mark and then
after we've done a reduction we have nothing left
over so the end result is 0 we would say this is
2 plus minus 2 equals 0 now I remind you that one
of the advantages in the multiset point of view is
that addition is no longer just a binary operation
because the act of dumping out containers into a
single container doesn't necessarily just require
two we can talk about three or four or more so
for example we might want to add this integer with
this integer with this integer and this integer
and there's no need for us to have brackets now
prescribing the order but we are allowed to
add them all at once you just dump all of the
contents out into a big M set so there's those
there's those five auntie marks signal auntie
mark and a pair of marks there we get this emsett
it's not yet reduced though because it has both
marks and anti-marxist so we're obliged to make
cancellations so we cancel those three with those
three then we just get these three NT marks and
a couple of marks that we have to do some more
cancellations and we end up with single auntie
mark so properties well addition is commutative
and associative well that's because M set addition
is when we combine multisets the order doesn't
matter and if we combine three or four more it
doesn't matter what order we combine them we all
get the same collection of the result anyway and
finally also this particular empty em set plays a
special role because it's the additive identity
namely if we add it to any integer em we get em
or and are more familiar notationally with a zero
plus M equals am so now we come to multiplication
of integers which is a little bit more subtle
but because we're talking about em sets it
turns out that we only really need to define our
multiplication at the level of the objects which
our ingredients of our am sets since we only
have three ingredients are mark nothing and our
auntie mark it's enough to say how those things
multiplied with each other so here is now an
extension of a multiplication table that we had in
a previous video where I told you how to multiply
mark and nothing by mark and nothing now we have
to also include the ante mark ok so this table
will be I think relatively obvious if we multiply
mark x mark we're going to define that to be mark
while mark x anti mark is going to be auntie mark
and commutative Lee auntie mark x mark will also
be auntie mark the empty nothing times anything is
going to be nothing I thought why there's blanks
here and here the only thing that's a little bit
special really novel is this entry here we're
going to define that the product of an anti mark
with an anti mark is a mark not nante mark but a
mark so this is a definition that we make what
we could make any definition we wanted to and
we would then have a corresponding arithmetic
but it would be more or less useful depending
on how reasonable our fundamental multiplication
table is so it turns out that this is really the
best choice as will soon see so in words we could
say that the table is telling us that something
times aunty something is anti something and also
the other order anti something times something
is aunty something and a novel one right here
is that anti something times anti something
is something so you should think about this as
being a definition that we're making and it's
maybe an arbitrary we don't need to justify we
just going to say here is exactly what we mean
by what an anti mark x nante Marcius it's defined
to be a mark the usefulness of this will make it
clear that this is a good definition so once we
have the multiplication of the ingredients then
the multiplication of em sets this case integers
just follows from the MC extension so for example
if we multiply mark mark x mark mark mark what we
do is we create a new multi set which consists of
all possible products of the entries here with the
entries here so we multiply this mark times that
mark that's a mark and then the first 10 times the
second the first one times the third and then the
second times the first the second times the second
the second time's the third we just go through all
possible products between these guys and these
guys and we make an M sent correspondingly here
we have an TMR can t mark x mark mark mark mark so
as long as we know how to multiply it aunty mark x
a mark we're okay we know how to do that a basic
multiplication table tells us that Santa mark so
we're going to have this product is an anti mark
and then so is the next one and the next one the
next one and then moving to this one its various
products will give us for more so all together
they're out there eight auntie marks there if we
multiply the empty em sent by say this negative
number then we have to take the possible products
of things in here times things in here and the
products are well empty x mark is always empty
so we get empty empty empty empty empty give
us all together empty and finally if we have this
negative number times its negative number we have
to use the fact that aunty mark x aunty mark is
a single mark so when we multiply this first one
times all of those we're going to get mark mark
mark mark and then this one times on those another
four marks and then this one another for and
that's the total so minus three x minus 4 is 12
so it's a little exercise you can show that the
basic multiplication table is associative that
basic starting multiplication at three by three
is associative and that it then follows that this
integer multiplication is also associative
so it's a very efficient and simple way of
first of all defining multiplication and sort of
seeing why the fundamental kind of lies satisfied
beginners in arithmetic often asked why is it
that negative number of times a negative number
should be a positive number it's not entirely
clear from our point of view it's because we've
defined it that way but that kind of begs the
question why have we defined it that way so why
is it that anti mark x anti mark equals mark
and not something else well one good answer
is because that ensures that multiplication
is actually consistent with our fundamental
relation that a mark adjacent to an anti mark
should equal nothing that we have cancellation
or annihilation of a particle in the antiparticle
so let me explain why that is so let's look at
this example here suppose we look at zero x
minus one okay so here's zero here's an aunty
mark we know that the product is zero suppose
we reconsider this by replacing this 0m set
with the M set mark mark bar so in the course
of a calculation if we got something like this
we would reduce that to this so although this
is not officially a integer it is a kind of
ingredient or a an expression that evaluates to
an integer let's work with the temporary let's
suppose that we try to do multiplication with
this replacement of zero times r minus 1 so we
have 1 times 1 bar let's see I should put up one
bar here okay so the rule is definitely that one
x 1 bar is one bar but suppose that we didn't know
what one bar x 1 bar is so we not sure about that
well what would it have to be in order that this
be consistent with this why we want this to be
equal to this so we require that what we're
getting here instead of that ? should be a
one so that these two will then cancel to give
us the zero that we require so consistency with
our basic annihilation rule really forces the mark
bar x mark bar to be the mark and another example
or maybe an extension or more elaborate way of
saying something similar is because it ensures
the distributive property of multiplication
and addition so if you have three integers n
P and Q then a basic property is that M times P
plus Q is equal to M times P plus m times Q and
I'm going to let you convince yourself this is a
true fact and that it does really you know involve
this particular fact things this has to be the
way it is in order for this kind of distributive
law to work smoothly now of course one of the main
reasons for having integers is so that we can also
have subtraction as a key operation so how do we
introduce subtraction into the story but it's very
simple we define M minus n to be M plus minus
1 times n so there's our minus 1 which is the
M set consisting of the ante mark mark bar so for
example if we have mark mark mark minus mark mark
mark mark mark low it's 3-5 and that's the same
as 3 plus minus 1 times the five there's our three
we don't have to multiply this M set with this M
set we get the M set of five auntie marks and then
when we add these two we just get an ting mark and
Mark loans- true okay so now you can verify some
basic fundamental laws of arithmetic involving
subtraction if mkn are integers that M times K
minus n is M times K minus M times n then M minus
k plus n is n minus K minus n that M plus k minus
n is n plus K minus n and the m minus K minus n is
n minus k plus n I guess this one here is also the
problematic sometimes for young people so what's
involved here implicitly is a kind of symmetry we
really have a symmetry between the natural numbers
and the negative numbers and it's encoded by this
multiplication by minus 1 here so we give that
an A and we can say that minus 1 times integer
n is minus n okay that's what we mean by minus n
it means we're multiplying by this minus 1 which
is our M set consisting of our single anti mark so
this is a fundamental symmetry which interchanges
NAT and neg call it negation and we'll see that
it has a lot of consequences this symmetry between
the positive and the negative so I hope you can
appreciate that the framework that we're setting
up here is pretty simple and things really kind
of fall into place because we're working in a
familiar emsett kind of environment and we know
how to add em sets and multiply em sets subject
to our basic sort of understandings so it's a
quite a pleasant kind of situation and it's nice
that there's really only these three fundamental
ingredients the ingredients of the mark on the
page the empty page and mark with a little bar
over it the ante mark and of course the multiset
framework that's another key ingredient this idea
that we're able to organize our data by using the
idea of multi set something which is unordered and
in which repetitions are allowed so we really have
now quite of a solid foundation for arithmetic
integer arithmetic is absolutely a fundamental
kind of building block for mathematics and let
me emphasize that you know there has not been
any games with axioms or assumptions or religious
belief systems or incantations all right we're not
proclaiming that something out there exists that
we can't get ahold of we're being very concrete
this is what you write down this is an example
of that this is exactly how you add or multiply
or subtract things we can illustrate what we're
doing very explicitly and concretely in a way that
everybody can follow and then end up answering the
questions in the same way but there's no religious
assumptions here about things that are beyond our
review and that may exist or not there's not even
any discussion about existence we're just talking
about things that we can write down computations
that we can make that we can exhibit concretely
and explicitly we're going to see that this
trichotomy really opens up all kinds of new doors
for us in terms of understanding lots of things
in mathematics in particular the linear algebra
kind of ideas that we were working with having
to do with Maxwell's and pixels and also Beck
Souls we're going to see that we can now look
at those things in a bigger broader light with
our view now of having integers as a tool for
building up mathematics it's very exciting and
it will be kind of mind opening for you a help
that's will do next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening